Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH), pages 192 - 202
July 14, 2022 ©2022 Association for Computational Linguistics
Accounting for Offensive Speech as a Practice of Resistance
Mark Díaz∗
Google Research
markdiaz@google.com
Razvan Amironesei∗
Google Research
amironesei@gmail.com
Laura Weidinger
DeepMind
lweidinger@deepmind.com
Iason Gabriel
DeepMind
iason@deepmind.com
Abstract
Tasks such as toxicity detection, hate speech
detection, and online harassment detection
have been developed for identifying interac-
tions involving offensive speech. In this work
we articulate the need for a relational un-
derstanding of offensiveness to help distin-
guish denotative offensive speech from offen-
sive speech serving as a mechanism through
which marginalized communities resist oppres-
sive social norms. Using examples from the
queer community, we argue that evaluations
of offensive speech must focus on the impacts
of language use. We motivate this use of lan-
guage in Cynic philosophy and use it to frame
a use of offensive speech as a practice of re-
sistance. We also explore the degree to which
NLP systems may encounter limits to model-
ing relational context.
1
Introduction
Tasks such as the detection of toxicity, hate speech,
and online harassment have been developed to iden-
tify and intervene in situations that have the poten-
tial to cause signiﬁcant social harm. These tasks
for identifying and classifying offensive or undesir-
able language have gone by different names (see:
(Waseem et al., 2017; Balayn et al., 2021)) and
have employed varying task deﬁnitions, but they
are united by a goal of reducing harm and break-
downs in civil discourse. Because language use
varies contextually, it is difﬁcult to model the nu-
anced social context that informs whether language
produces harm. Offensive language classiﬁcation
and related tasks capture different forms of undesir-
able language, such as language that is rude, incites
hate, causes offense, or causes people to disengage
from online interaction.
In this paper, we discuss a form of offensive
language that has not previously received much
research attention in the machine learning (ML)
∗Authors contributed equally
community, namely offensive language that is ben-
eﬁcial in its use and whose prosocial effects are
sociologically and historically documented.
In
other words, language that uses terminology which
is often noted as offensive, but which is not per-
ceived as offensive in particular contexts of use.
We distinguish this language with contextually-
speciﬁc beneﬁcial impacts as reappropriated. Un-
derstanding how to characterize and model this
kind of language is important not only because of
its widespread use, but also because of the criti-
cal sociological role it can play, particularly within
marginalized communities.
We contribute: 1) a framing of offensiveness
that accounts for socially productive uses of de-
notatively offensive language; 2) a general under-
standing of offensive language that builds from
deﬁnitions of hate speech and toxicity to show the
difﬁculty of operationalizing relational context; 3)
speciﬁc challenges and directions for improving
how we operationalize relational aspects of offen-
siveness.
We also call on researchers developing offen-
sive speech classiﬁcation tasks to engage with of-
fensiveness as a social relation that arises not just
between individuals in communication but also be-
tween communities of discourse. In other words,
offensiveness and its impacts are best understood
from the perspectives of those already embedded
in relationships that structure who produces, re-
ceives, perceives and who is targeted (i.e., who is
implicitly or explicitly named) by offensive speech.
We separately name reception and perception to
distinguish between the recipient(s) of a message,
such as an alias tagged in a Tweet, and those who
may not be the intended audience but to whom the
content is visible. However, practical challenges
in data collection and annotation task design can
cause offensiveness to be implicitly operationalized
as a semantic property of language.
Our discussion begins with the foundations of
192

offensiveness, adding to challenges that have been
highlighted by others. We also provide considera-
tions and steps forward for improving automated
offensiveness classiﬁcation. We argue that account-
ing for the social and historical constitution of of-
fensive language is important for the responsible
development of automated and semi-automated
tools to identify offensive language. To do so,
in turn, deepens our understanding of offensive
speech and recognizes the disparate impacts or
ends of offensive language (e.g., as a means to
silence others; as a means to challenge existing
social structures).
2
A Working Deﬁnition of Offensiveness
Natural language processing (NLP) systems have
historically faced challenges identifying and classi-
fying denotatively offensive language used with
inoffensive connotation (Ashwitha et al., 2021;
Weitzel et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2021). A chal-
lenge inherent to deﬁning different forms of hate-
ful, toxic, or offensive language is that the char-
acterization of these terms is necessarily socially,
culturally, and politically speciﬁc. For this reason,
Hovy and Yang (2021) identify the robust inclusion
of social context in understanding language as a
key missing component for the success of model-
ing approaches. Building from deﬁnitions of hate
speech and toxicity, we establish a working deﬁ-
nition of offensiveness that can better account for
missing social context.
Hate speech is typically deﬁned to link the use
of derogatory language to a person or people based
on group membership, such as “some characteristic
such as race, color, ethnicity, gender, sexual orien-
tation, nationality, religion, or other characteristics”
(Basile et al., 2019). One of the key characteristics
of this deﬁnition is that it focuses on the injury ap-
plied to a speciﬁc subject of offense. Broadly, deﬁ-
nitions of hate speech underscore a need to identify
who the target is in order to assess offense or harm.
We argue that the target of offensive language is
best understood with respect to differential rela-
tions and power dynamics between them and the
producers, receivers, and perceivers of offensive
speech.
In contrast to hate speech and other deﬁnitions
of offensive language, toxicity is speciﬁcally ori-
ented around the measurable outcome of language
use. Deﬁned as, “a rude, disrespectful, or unreason-
able comment that is likely to make people leave
a discussion,"1 it does not engage explicitly with
injury or harm, but links it to measurable behavior.
Toxicity helps bring attention to the ends of reap-
propriated offensive language, and what character-
istics can help distinguish it from denotative uses of
offensive language. On its own, however, it is not
clear that it sufﬁces to protect the user’s best inter-
est, as it does not engage explicitly with the subject
of verbal injury. The deﬁnition serves those with
an interest to maximize user engagement, i.e. to
minimize the chances of the user “leaving a discus-
sion”. It is conceivable that users who experience
offense may not leave a discussion, for example
in cases where users are habitually exposed to the
relevant offense, such as microaggressions.
Hate speech and toxicity help us to construct a
relational view for grounding a more robust deﬁni-
tion of offensiveness– that is, a view that considers
the social relations among targets of offensive lan-
guage, and the producers, receivers, and perceivers
(each of whom can also be a target) of denotatively
offensive speech. This view is focused on identify-
ing the network of social relations rather than some
essential attribute of words or phrases.
3
Drag Queens and the Cynic
Perspective
In this section, we analyze language use within the
queer community to show how social relations and
the ends of targeted language can help us to under-
stand how denotatively offensive language 1) can
have expressly beneﬁcial ends and 2) can work as a
social practice of collective resistance which fulﬁlls
a function of “self-innoculation” against out-group
antagonism. We speciﬁcally analyze mock impo-
liteness used by drag queens that implicitly offers
a critique of exclusionary sexual mores and social
attitudes that hinder the self-expression of queer
communities. These social attitudes include the
demonization of queer sexuality, gender expression
and visibility. We foreground our example with the
case of Cynic offensive speech, which we present
as a historical practice of resistance to unreﬂective
social conventions. We show that denotatively of-
fensive language as vehiculated by drag queens is
not an isolated sociological phenomenon but in-
stead should be inscribed in a history of practices
of resistance.
1https://developers.perspectiveapi.com/s/about-the-api-
attributes-and-languages: :text=%EF%BB%BFAttributestext=
Perspective’s%20main%20attribute%20is%20TOXICITY,make
%20you%20leave%20a%20discussion%E2%80%9D
193

Culpeper (2011) deﬁnes mock impoliteness as
language which “consists of impolite forms whose
effects are (at least theoretically for the most part)
canceled by the context.” The author continues "[...]
mock impoliteness in theoretical terms [is under-
stood] as involving the canceling of impoliteness’
perlocutionary effects ﬂowing from a convention-
alised impoliteness formula when an obvious mis-
match emerges with the context it is used in.” One
key aspect that we want to emphasize here is how
mock impoliteness works to both reduce the harm-
ful effects of targeted insult while supporting social
bonding and relationship building.
3.1
Mock Impoliteness in the Queer
Community
The use of mock impoliteness is not exclusive to
the queer community. However, compared with
other uses of mock impoliteness, its use in the
queer community acts as a form of social resistance
(McKinnon, 2017). Although, building in-group
solidarity and social bonding are signiﬁcant effects
of mock impoliteness, we focus on what it means
for queer individuals to “self-innoculate” against
offensive language by practicing employing it them-
selves. McKinnon (2017) uses mock impoliteness
to show that “utterances, which could potentially
be evaluated as genuine impoliteness outside of
the appropriate context, are positively evaluated by
in-group members who recognize the importance
of “building a thick skin” to face a hostile environ-
ment both explicitly via the deployment of offen-
sive language which targets marginalized commu-
nities (e.g., slurs) and implicitly via the structures
of civil language, which may inhibit certain forms
of expression by marginalized communities (e.g.,
comments highlighting nontraditional gender ex-
pression). One complexity in interpreting language
that relies heavily on context, is the “context col-
lapse” that takes place on platforms such as Twitter
(Marwick and Boyd, 2011). A drag queen may
target the drag community in a Tweet, relying on
shared contextual markers with their targeted au-
dience - for example, assuming shared norms of
mock impoliteness, and a mutual understanding
that slurs are not intended literally. However on
platforms such as Twitter, where the wider public
can see these messages, perceivers may lack this
context and thus interpret such utterances as offen-
sive. This “context collapse” must be accounted
for to assess the content of a given Tweet.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Examples of mock impoliteness from promi-
nent drag queens featured on RuPaul’s Drag Race.
Oliva et al. (2021) describe erroneously high
toxicity probabilities (provided by the Perspective
API) for language from drag queens on Twitter2.
Although toxicity is distinct from offensiveness,
their analysis shows how the difﬁculty of imple-
menting a relational approach and detecting rela-
tional context in practice can cause the concept
to be misapplied. This difﬁculty applies not only
to classifying toxicity, but also classifying hate
speech, offensiveness, and other language rooted in
relational context. The authors compare tweets that
contain queer vernacular produced by drag queens
to racist tweets written by white supremacists that
are predicted to have low toxicity. As the authors
point out, many of the swear words and slurs used
among drag queens that might otherwise be con-
sidered insulting or rude, are used playfully. To
characterize the constructive nature of language in
this example, it is not only important to understand
the individual relation and the type of humor be-
tween two drag queens engaging with each other,
but also to understand their marginalized social po-
sitions relative to broader society. This example
brings to light the difﬁculty of not only developing
a relational framing but also practical challenges in
identifying this relational context in data.
2Oliva et al. (2021) offer an example tweet of mock impo-
liteness: tweet by drag queen Darienne Lake, “So proud of
this bitch. Love seeing you on @AmericanIdol.”
194

Contrary to Oliva et al., we are not focused here
on toxicity. Rather, we assess the above example in
terms of offensiveness and disambiguate between
hate speech, toxicity and offensive speech not only
at the deﬁnitional level but also at a conceptual
level. For example, applying Perspective API’s def-
inition of toxicity is complicated by the fact that,
presented without context to a perceiver or data
annotator, this language may be indistinguishable
from rude, uncivil, indecent and impolite exchange.
In addition, with context but without knowledge of
sociological norms within the community, it may
still be assumed by a perceiver that the exchange
also leads to disengagement, thus qualifying the
interaction as toxic. This challenge for outside
perceivers highlights a need to identify which con-
text is required in instances where members of a
community of discourse - in this case drag queens
- may break normative rules of civility (such as
by using widely acknowledged hateful terms like
“fag”, “tranny”, or “dyke”) and consensually use
language deemed uncivil by mainstream standards.
3.2
Mutual Recognition and Consent
It is important to emphasize that social position-
ality, (that is, the roles one can fulﬁll in a given
social context) is crucial for disambiguating offen-
sive content. Take the example of the Cynics to
whom offense fulﬁlls an ascetic role as part of a
larger project of living one’s life by practicing spir-
itual exercises. Cynic philosophy is deﬁned by a
denunciation of normative social conventions and
by a demand to “return to a simple life in confor-
mity with nature” (Hadot, 2002). Cynic philosophy,
as set out by the philosopher Diogenes, established
ethical practices that its proponents put forward to
support a virtuous way of life, which was achieved
through severe self-discipline and the strategic use
of offensive language. Similar to mock impolite-
ness, cynic insult was used as a way to critique
unreﬂective social norms from a position of subju-
gation. In this respect they both play a sociological
role as practices of resistance. However, whereas
the outcome of offensive language for Cynics was
to further the way of life of an ancient school of
thought, for drag queens, the outcome is solidaris-
tic bonding, identity formation, and queer survival
in the face of marginalization.
Thus, we must ask if consenting to being both
the producer and recipient of offensive language
is a sufﬁcient condition for an observer to iden-
tify the language as inoffensive or for a platform
to tolerate it. In this case, the drag queens direct-
ing tweets at each other recognize a shared queer
identity referenced in a speciﬁc type of offensive
language and can be reasonably conﬁdent that their
messages will be considered a practice of mock
impoliteness based on queer vernacular and social
dynamics. Critically, mock impoliteness as used by
drag queens and members of the queer community
features slurs and insults that have precisely been
used in targeted harassment against them. Among
members of the queer community, interactions such
as these are predicated upon a dynamic of group
exchanges, recognition of group membership, and
awareness of such language as used by outgroup
members (e.g., the use of slurs such as ‘faggot’ or
‘tranny’ and insults focused on sexual behavior and
femininity).
Recognition of the sociological norms of mock
impoliteness is reﬂected in reciprocal, consensual
engagement. In this way, mock impoliteness is a
mutually socially constructed phenomenon. How-
ever, it is critical to note that language use within
groups may not be consistently used or recognized
by all. For example, someone new to the drag com-
munity might be initially unfamiliar with mock
impoliteness, mistaking it for malice, and others
within the community may simply not engage in
mock impoliteness. In these cases, reciprocal, con-
sensual engagement is not achieved. This shows
that recognition of offensive discourse is still an
insufﬁcient condition to identify mock impolite-
ness and that it may need to be followed by explicit
consent to offensive language.
Although we name the combination of recog-
nition and mutual consent to offensive language
as reasons for potentially tolerating its use on a
platform, we do not argue in favor of protecting
hateful exchanges among producers and receivers
who target individuals or groups outside of their
own. This would include, for example, two ho-
mophobic individuals bonding over and consent-
ing to uses of queer slurs among themselves. Any
community of discourse that promotes racist, ho-
mophobic, xenophobic, or similar ideas should be
submitted to scrutiny. Out of context, drag queen’s
reappropriated offensive speech may appear to do
just this, showing that recognition and consent be-
tween producer and recipient to offensive language
are not sufﬁcient conditions for identifying mock
impoliteness. To build from linguistic recognition
195

and consent, we ask why and, in particular, to what
ends do drag queens invoke offensive language on
the platform?
As Oliva et al. describe, much of the language
used in the tweets they analyzed is reﬂective of
mock impoliteness among members of the queer
community, which is a critically important act of
socializing– or training– ingroup members to inure
and defend themselves from derogatory remarks
lobbed by outgroup members. While mock impo-
liteness features swear words and often employs ho-
mophobic slurs, this language can be distinguished
from offensive language invoked by outgroup ha-
rassers in at least two important ways.
First, mock impoliteness serves to inure queer
individuals to homophobic attacks from outgroup
members, as well as to hostility from other commu-
nity members (McKinnon, 2017; Murray, 1979).
In this way, offensiveness is used as a rhetorical
means to prosocial ends that effectively resist to
exclusionary social norms that seek to deﬁne queer
existence. Taking automated action on offensive-
ness as an end in itself to be identiﬁed stands to
ignore its prosocial impacts and ignores the web
of social relations that support queer survival. In
order to develop content moderation and related
processes that predict and mitigate harm, offensive-
ness must also be conceptualized in such a way that
accounts for the beneﬁcial impacts, or ends, of lan-
guage rather than treating offensiveness as a ﬁxed,
negative property of language itself. While mock
impoliteness might be read as targeted harassment
by a random or non-queer audience, a relational
lens makes clear that offensiveness can operate
within a dynamic relation of in-group recognition
that consolidates the formation of a social identity.
In this respect, the queer practice of mock im-
politeness parallels a Cynic practice of training
for adversity. The Cynic analogy of the adaptive
mouse describes the actions of a mouse adapting
itself to harsh living environments. The analogy
describes how Diogenes, the preeminent Cynic,
rolled himself “over hot sand, while in winter he
used to embrace statues covered with snow, using
every means of inuring himself to hardship.” The
practice of inuring oneself to hardship is consistent
with the description of the drag queens practice of
“building a thick skin.” The Cynics and drag queens
have distinct motivations and engage in distinct be-
havior, however queer practices of self-inoculation
parallel a lineage of ”building a thick skin”, ﬁgura-
tively and literally within a history of practices of
training for adversity.
Second, as the case of mock impoliteness illus-
trates, characterizing the ends (or potential ends)
of offensiveness is central. The goal of this work is
not to propose a universal taxonomy of offensive-
ness. Instead, we turn attention to understanding
how offensiveness functions as a social practice and
the ends it produces in order for us to account for
the various ways of operationalizing it. Focusing
on the complex intentions of offensiveness allows
us to describe its relational nature.
We characterize two types of ends – those that
are individual and those that are plural or collec-
tive and related to belonging to a recognized social
identity. Individual ends refer to the impacts local
to a speciﬁc interaction and the people directly en-
gaged. This includes the interlocutors as well as
individual entities named explicitly or implicitly in
an utterance. Plural ends refer to those that impact
individuals who are not speciﬁcally named or in-
volved but who may bear witness to an interaction
describing their social group, such as through a
curated social media feed. This includes utterances
that name groups or communities. Though they
don’t speciﬁcally discuss the ends of offensiveness
or abusive language (Waseem et al., 2017) impor-
tantly highlight that many classiﬁcation tasks can
be understood in relation to whether they focus on
language that is directed toward a speciﬁc individ-
ual or entity or whether they focus on language
directed toward a generalized group. In discussing
ends we posit that intergroup linguistic based recog-
nition between parties are necessary but insufﬁcient
conditions for identifying offensive language with
beneﬁcial outcomes. A sufﬁcient condition for al-
lowing the presence of offensive language is the
veriﬁable absence of harm.
But our argument with respect to the articulation
of ends goes further. As a way to illustrate the
sociological relevance of mock impoliteness in the
context of drag queen discourse as a practice of
“building a thick skin,” we placed the concept in a
history of ethical and spiritual practice of offensive
language in the Cynic philosophy.
In both the case of mock impoliteness and the
case of the Cynics there are distinct yet connected
practices of engaging with adversarial conditions
and social norms.
The Cynic use of offensive
speech is focused on creating a space for the prac-
tice of a virtuous way of life actualized via sys-
196

tematic practices of training and endurance. Of-
fense as a public act of provocation instantiates
the ethical substance of a “life of battle and strug-
gle against and for others (Foucault and Foucault,
2012).” queer practices of building thick skin via
offensive speech is similarly deﬁned by the preser-
vation and self-expression of a social identity. In
this way, queer mock impoliteness also stands as an
example of reclaiming offensive language, which
has been studied and documented in relation to
social justice targets, such as misogyny (Gaucher
et al., 2015) and ableism (Smith, 2012).
4
Rethinking Offensiveness for Machine
Learning Practice
In our assessment of mock impoliteness, we moti-
vate a relational frame with an example of marginal
discourse to bring attention to social relations re-
ﬂective of power dynamics in society. However this
does not emerge from a void. Rather, it is grounded
in a broad range of conceptual precedents that ar-
ticulate the social, ethical and epistemological role
of relationality. For example, Foucault’s analyzes
power (pouvoir) as a techno-social relation of sub-
jection (Foucault, 2012) and of freedom (Foucault,
1982), Arendt theorizes power as a capacity to act
in concert with others (Arendt, 2013), Weber un-
derstands power (Macht) as the exercise of a will
on another will (Weber, 2019), and Patricia Hill
Collins’ analysis of lived experience within the do-
main of Black feminist epistemologies are key to
our argument (Collins, 2002). In particular, Hill
Collins analyzes the “connections between knowl-
edge and power relations” and the particular forms
of knowledge operative in Black women’s lived
experience.
In all of these cases, relationality unveils and
constitutes new forms of knowledge, new forms of
ethical action, and new forms of individual and col-
lective experience. More speciﬁcally, in the space
of AI ethics, Birhane (2021) discusses relational
ethics as a “framework” that re-examines “hierar-
chical power asymmetries,” how the “contingent
and interconnected background that algorithmic
systems emerge from (and are deployed to) in the
process of protecting the welfare of the most vul-
nerable.” Cooper et al. (2022) put forward a frame-
work for relational accountability, Viljoen (2021)
proposes a relational theory of data governance
which shows how “data relations result in supra-
individual legal interests” that in turn “materialize
unjust social relations” via data ﬂows which order
in particular ways social existence.
At the conceptual level a relational frame shows
that particular social and historical context is cru-
cial to account for how offensive speech emerges
and is constituted in a network of social relations by
introducing discursive markers of style (as our ex-
ample of mock impoliteness in drag queen shows)
rather than relying on the perceived essential at-
tribute of words or phrases. It also lays the founda-
tion for practical experimentation and highlights av-
enues for designing classiﬁcation tasks and identi-
fying what context must be accounted for in data an-
notation, dataset construction, and modeling tech-
niques.
4.1
Providing Context to Annotators
Drawing from a relational frame, there are oppor-
tunities to improve annotation task design and data
collection by leveraging intuitive human under-
standings of social context. For example, annota-
tion task instructions can invoke relational context
that humans implicitly use to judge the offensive
nature of language. Sap et al. (2019) introduced
dialect priming to annotators as a contextual cue
to the origins of an utterance. They primed anno-
tators with a measure of an utterances’ alignment
with AAE, which signiﬁcantly reduced the degree
to which they rated AAE utterances as toxic. In
addition, when asked to consider the tweet author’s
likely race, annotators were also less likely to iden-
tify AAE tweets as toxic.
Identifying an utterance as in alignment with
AAE implicitly introduces sociologically informed
norms about language use, the contexts in which it
is likely to be used and consented to, and broader
social context about how language produced by the
likely author may be perceived. However, other
work has found limited success in providing anno-
tators with more context (Pavlopoulos et al., 2020).
More work is needed to explore how exactly an-
notators use additional context, and in which in-
stances additional context is most inﬂuential it is
not clear exactly how annotators used contextual
information to make sense of the tweet prompts.
Moreover, research is needed to explore the role
of context in data annotation, for example, to ex-
plore avenues of capturing why a rater may anno-
tate utterances the way that they do. Annotators’
sense making practices– how they rely on different
contextual clues when making judgments– remain
197

generally unclear in text labeling. Signiﬁcant cor-
relations have been shown between annotators’ po-
litical views and their ratings of antiblack speech,
suggesting that political viewpoints may also be
worth considering or documenting when selecting
annotators or evaluating interrater agreement (Sap
et al., 2021). Similarly, Prabhakaran et al. (2021)
found differences between black and non-black an-
notator’s labels of sentiment on age-related text
prompts. Conversely, little work has explored how
raters ﬁll in contextual gaps when details are not
provided, for example what kinds of assumptions
might be made about the producer of an utterance,
which, in terms of race, critical race scholars would
suggest Whiteness is assumed (Sue, 2006). Given
the use of the globally distributed crowd workforce,
the ways in which these assumptions may differ
across regions also stands to be explored.
A parallel direction to highlighting additional
social context is to select data annotators with the
ability to recognize the sociological norms embed-
ded in context. The recognition of the norms sur-
rounding language use is predicated on knowledge
of, experience with, or proximity to speciﬁc forms
of language use. In this vein, machine learning
researchers have highlighted a need for considering
annotator social identity in both dataset documen-
tation (Prabhakaran et al., 2021; Díaz et al., 2022)
as well as in modeling techniques (Davani et al.,
2021). In Sap et al. (2019)’s work it is not clear
whether and how individual annotators may have
taken race and dialect information into account
when making judgments.
However, prior work on data annotation by Pat-
ton et al. (2019) shows that annotators’ social iden-
tity and lived experiences can shape the cues they
draw from when making annotation judgments.
Moreover, they demonstrate that lived experience
can inform different judgments in comparison with
annotators who have been formally educated and
trained on the concepts being annotated. This has
particularly important implications for the anno-
tation of linguistic phenomena such as mock im-
politeness by drag queens and others in the queer
community, which may not be familiar or legible to
annotators who do not share a queer social identity.
Mock impoliteness and the Cynic thought are
key to unveiling historical and sociological reasons
for offensiveness language use. We rely on the
intuition that annotators with knowledge and/or
shared group membership are more likely to be
exposed to sociological norms used within their
own social groups than to norms in other groups.
For members of marginalized groups, recognizing
these sociological norms is also an implicit recog-
nition of the social and ethical modes of resistance
that they represent and embody. At the same time,
it is critical to acknowledge that no social group
is monolithic, so there are inherent limits to both
the degree to which members are representative of
other members as well as the degree to which they
can be expected to recognize mock impoliteness
from other in-group members.
4.2
Ends and Outcomes of Offensiveness
Another avenue for improving offensiveness clas-
siﬁcation is to bring its measurable outcomes into
focus. Treating offensive language as a means to
an end underscores decisions about which of its dif-
ferent ends we seek to identify, whether beneﬁcial
in the case of queer resistance or more negative in
cases of insult. Identifying which impacts to focus
on can shift design and implementation practices.
By bringing focus to the likelihood of offensive
language to cause a person to disengage from in-
teraction, toxicity as deﬁned by Jigsaw provides an
example of incorporating measurable ends into the
deﬁnition of the classiﬁcation task. As such, the
deﬁnition inspires speciﬁc behaviors or outcomes
to be measured. Acknowledging the ways in which
members of marginalized communities stand to
be disproportionately harmed, it is also prudent to
consider how people with marginalized identities
may respond to negative or harmful language dif-
ferently from others. For example, because they
are more likely to endure disrespectful or harassing
language, people with marginalized identities may
endure offensive language in interactions longer
than others. This means that a behavioral measure,
such as exiting a conversation, may be differently
predictive of offensiveness depending on the social
identities of targets involved.
Nonetheless, capturing offensive language under
the label ‘toxicity’ is an interesting departure from
other labels used to describe offensiveness, such as
‘misogynous’ or ‘aggressive’, because of its focus
on using observable behavior as a metric. Mishra
et al. (2019) also take into account observable be-
havior by modeling sexist and racist tweets using
author proﬁles. Doing so captured repeated behav-
iors and hateful discourses represented in certain
proﬁles and improved model performance. Model-
198

ing user proﬁle discourse stands as a way to com-
bine language modeling with measurable behavior
for identifying offensive language. As Cheng et al.
(2017) show, trolling behavior can be predicted,
in part, from user mood as measured through re-
cent user history, which offers a signal of unwanted
speech. . Of course, not all offensive language is
produced by online trolls and not all online trolls
produce offensive language. However, as Mishra
et al. show, capturing histories of behavior and
interactions, including their associated norms and
patterns of speech can be an avenue for using be-
havioral measures to improve language modeling.
Bringing focus to platform and account-level be-
havior also affords the ability to infer additional
social context, such as user political alignment,
which scholars have predicted based on interac-
tions and follower lists on Twitter (Colleoni et al.,
2014). In addition, Hovy (2015) found that training
gender- and age-”aware” classiﬁers using embed-
dings created from user reviews ﬁltered by author
age and gender provided modest, consistent im-
provements in topic classiﬁcation and sentiment
analysis tasks. Using similar techniques, informa-
tion about content producers might be used to pre-
vent their content from over-moderation, which
Oliva et al. suggest impacts drag queens on Twit-
ter. As yet another alternative, modeling discourse
and discursive styles might be used to allow per-
ceivers to selectively ﬁlter out undesired language
from their social media feeds. At the platform
level, this raises the potential for serious privacy
and surveillance concerns which must be consid-
ered. However, even at the level of individual in-
teractions, work in NLP has shown it is possible to
identify aspects of interpersonal communication in
chat contexts, such as whether a relation is cooper-
ative (Rashid et al., 2020).
Operationalizing offensiveness in terms of spe-
ciﬁc ends also allows developers to focus on partic-
ular harms and, for content moderation, add speci-
ﬁcity to whether individual or symbolic harms may
be at stake. On platforms where individual inter-
actions may be visible to many, such as Twitter,
there are murky questions about how to prioritize
impacts on targets in comparison to impacts on per-
ceivers if and when they diverge. For example, a
digital passerby (perceiver) who is unfamiliar with
queer mock impoliteness may take offense based
on language used within a tweet, even if the tweet
producer and receiver are mutually engaging in
mock impoliteness. More broadly, misunderstand-
ings of mock impoliteness might normalize offen-
sive language use for those who do not recognize
its contextual nature. Platforms must consider if
and in which circumstances impacts to perceivers,
who may interpret a message as earnest, warrant
consideration over the target of the message.
These considerations are particularly salient in
regard to platforms that allow one-to-many com-
munication, however they are also relevant for plat-
forms or spaces limited to private or one-on-one
interactions. Certain kinds of language that we
have not discussed here, for example antisemitic
utterances, may be harmful even if the recipient is
not offended and no third party reads the content
(e.g., if the content is shared in a private message).
As such messages can incite violence or hate by as-
serting that some groups or individuals are of lower
value than others, these messages can cause harm.
This may warrant their detection and prohibition
on a given platform.
4.3
Limits to Modeling Context
Identifying context and the ends of offensiveness as
key components for deﬁning offensiveness raises
challenges and illustrates limits to developing au-
tomated classiﬁcation tasks. One major difﬁculty
lies in inferring or recording contextual data.
Social identity has been a through line in our
examples of the role context plays in both how of-
fensiveness operates as well as in machine learning
annotation. However, annotating or documenting
social identity, in particular, becomes challenging
and ethically dubious, as Scheuerman et al. (2020)
discuss with regard to gender and race annotation
for computer vision. NLP techniques that have
been used to infer or extract demographic charac-
teristics such as age (Hovy and Søgaard, 2015),
can provide helpful approximations; however they
are limited by similar ethical concerns to annota-
tion. Moreover, identifying social characteristics
of an individual or group targeted in, receiving, or
perceiving an utterance may be impossible to deter-
mine. Documenting demographic information of
data annotators and explicitly inviting reﬂection on
identity to broaden the sociological norms a rater
pool is able to recognize may be a promising alter-
native. Importantly, this requires limits to protect
the privacy of workers, particularly if workers with
marginalized identities are repeatedly sought out
for their ability to recognize how people in their
199

communities communicate. This is to say that eval-
uating the social identities of actors involved in an
online interaction, as well as the social identities
of those perceiving or annotating the interaction,
is a hurdle. Indeed, social media platforms often
allow degrees of anonymity that make such a task
impossible to do with any reliability.
Importantly, we cannot rely on social identity
alone to determine whether a person will be of-
fended by language or not. Social identity groups
are not monolithic and identity likely has varying
ability to predict dynamics in different geographic
regions or for members new to group sociality. In
addition, social identity is ﬂuid across contexts and
time. An obvious example is a change in one’s
age over time, but even at the same age, one may
identify as young or old relative to the individuals
they are with. It may make sense to consider social
identity in relation to the speciﬁc temporal context
of an utterance, yet headline news stories about
prominent individuals who have lied about their
social identities, such as Rachel Dolezal3, offer a
clear example of cases where social interactions
once considered innocuous undergo re-evaluation.
In other words, what is the identity that should be
annotated or documented, and what bearing should
this have on future classiﬁcation of this language?
More broadly, there are hard limits to inferring cul-
tural context on the global web, which introduces
challenges to identifying potential harms of offen-
sive language, and adds difﬁculty to observing or
measuring these ends compared with those of in-
dividual harms. For these reasons, user interface
components that allow users to provide direct input
on potentially offensive content remain valuable.
Detection and moderation practices that are un-
able to distinguish sociological patterns underpin-
ning mock impoliteness stand to target it as well
as underlying practices of reclaiming language. In-
deed, Oliva et al. (2020) precisely raise censorship
of drag queens’ mock impoliteness as motivation
for their work. Evidence of racial biases in offen-
sive language classiﬁcation and reports of the neg-
ative impacts of ‘race-blind’ approaches to content
moderation also suggest that poorly targeted de-
tection approaches may disproportionately impact
marginalized communities. Due to the limits intro-
duced by detecting social identity and observing
platform behavior, language models are unlikely to
3https://www.theguardian.com/us-
news/2017/feb/25/rachel-dolezal-not-going-stoop-apologise-
grovel
identify mock impoliteness language in all cases.
In practice, selecting a set of annotators aligned
with the communities and sociological norms rep-
resented in data is nontrivial. There are also limits
to the types and amounts of sociodemographic in-
formation that can or should be collected about
data annotators and users. However, as offensive
language classiﬁcation improves, insights into pro-
viding context in annotation can also serve to shape
content moderation processes, for example, by in-
corporating similar context for human review of
content. In this respect, our work contributes to
the development of frameworks of analysis attuned
to sociological and historical modes of discourse
that are critical for the responsible deployment of
offensive language classiﬁcation tasks.
5
Conclusion
Contrary to common understandings of offensive
language as negative and harmful, we show that
offensive speech can function as a practice of resis-
tance to unjust social norms and, in speciﬁc cases,
can serve a socially beneﬁcial role. In doing so
we highlight three necessary criteria for evaluating
offensive language, 1) the subject of an offensive
utterance and their social position, 2) the outcomes
of offensive language, and 3) the sociological role
that offensiveness and offense serves. Queer mock
impoliteness speciﬁcally illustrates that, although
sarcasm, humor, and irony pose signiﬁcant chal-
lenges to existing classiﬁcation tasks, there is an
ethical and social need to account for subversive
uses of denotatively offensive language. This type
of reappropriated speech serves to solidify a col-
lective identity, protect ingroup members from out-
group abuse, and resist exclusionary and restrictive
social norms. The practice ﬁnds its historical emer-
gence in a different yet related practice of training
for adversity put forward by the Cynics in which
offensive discourse works as a way to challenge
unreﬂective societal norms. Although operational-
izing a relational deﬁnition of offensiveness comes
with challenges, such as practical and ethical limits
to observing social identity and user behavior, we
point to promising research directions to better ac-
count for the expressly beneﬁcial sociological role
that offensiveness can play in social discourse.
References
Hannah Arendt. 2013. The human condition. Univer-
sity of Chicago press.
200

A Ashwitha, G Shruthi, HR Shruthi, Makarand Upad-
hyaya, Abhra Pratip Ray, and TC Manjunath. 2021.
Sarcasm detection in natural language processing.
Materials Today: Proceedings, 37:3324–3331.
Agathe Balayn, Jie Yang, Zoltan Szlavik, and Alessan-
dro Bozzon. 2021.
Automatic Identiﬁcation of
Harmful, Aggressive, Abusive, and Offensive Lan-
guage on the Web: A Survey of Technical Biases
Informed by Psychology Literature. ACM Transac-
tions on Social Computing, 4(3):1–56.
Valerio Basile, Cristina Bosco, Elisabetta Fersini,
Nozza
Debora,
Viviana
Patti,
Francisco
Manuel Rangel Pardo,
Paolo Rosso,
Manuela
Sanguinetti, et al. 2019.
Semeval-2019 task 5:
Multilingual detection of hate speech against immi-
grants and women in twitter. In 13th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 54–63.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Abeba Birhane. 2021.
Algorithmic injustice: a rela-
tional ethics approach. Patterns, 2(2):100205.
Justin Cheng, Michael Bernstein, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Anyone
can become a troll: Causes of trolling behavior in
online discussions. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
conference on computer supported cooperative work
and social computing, pages 1217–1230.
Elanor Colleoni, Alessandro Rozza, and Adam Arvids-
son. 2014.
Echo chamber or public sphere? pre-
dicting political orientation and measuring political
homophily in twitter using big data. Journal of com-
munication, 64(2):317–332.
Patricia Hill Collins. 2002.
Black feminist thought:
Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of em-
powerment. routledge.
A Feder Cooper, Benjamin Laufer, Emanuel Moss,
and Helen Nissenbaum. 2022.
Accountability in
an algorithmic society: Relationality, responsibility,
and robustness in machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.05338.
Jonathan Culpeper. 2011.
Impoliteness: Using lan-
guage to cause offence, volume 28. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinod-
kumar Prabhakaran. 2021. Dealing with disagree-
ments: Looking beyond the majority vote in subjec-
tive annotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05719.
Mark Díaz, Ian Kivlichan, Rachel Rosen, Dylan K.
Baker,
Razvan Amironesei,
Vinodkumar Prab-
hakaran, and Emily Denton. 2022.
Crowdwork-
sheets:
Accounting for individual and collective
identities underlying crowdsourced dataset annota-
tion.
In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
FAccT ’22. Association for Computing Machinery.
Michel Foucault. 1982. The subject and power. Criti-
cal inquiry, 8(4):777–795.
Michel Foucault. 2012.
Discipline and punish: The
birth of the prison. Vintage.
Michel Foucault and Michel Foucault. 2012.
The
courage of the truth: (the government of self and
others II). Lectures at the collège de France, 1983 -
1984. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Danielle Gaucher, Brianna Hunt, and Lisa Sinclair.
2015.
Can pejorative terms ever lead to positive
social consequences? The case of SlutWalk. Lan-
guage Sciences, 52:121–130.
Pierre Hadot. 2002. What is ancient philosophy? Har-
vard University Press.
Dirk Hovy. 2015. Demographic factors improve classi-
ﬁcation performance. In Proceedings of the 53rd an-
nual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th international joint confer-
ence on natural language processing (volume 1:
Long papers), pages 752–762.
Dirk Hovy and Anders Søgaard. 2015. Tagging perfor-
mance correlates with author age. In Proceedings of
the 53rd annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and the 7th international joint
conference on natural language processing (volume
2: Short papers), pages 483–488.
Dirk Hovy and Diyi Yang. 2021. The Importance of
Modeling Social Factors of Language: Theory and
Practice. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 588–602, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Alice E Marwick and Danah Boyd. 2011. I tweet hon-
estly, i tweet passionately: Twitter users, context col-
lapse, and the imagined audience. New media & so-
ciety, 13(1):114–133.
Sean McKinnon. 2017. “Building a thick skin for each
other”: The use of ‘reading’as an interactional prac-
tice of mock impoliteness in drag queen backstage
talk. Journal of Language and Sexuality, 6(1):90–
127.
Pushkar Mishra, Marco Del Tredici, Helen Yan-
nakoudakis, and Ekaterina Shutova. 2019. Author
proﬁling for hate speech detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.06734.
Stephen O Murray. 1979. The art of gay insulting. An-
thropological Linguistics, 21(5):211–223.
Thiago Dias Oliva, Dennys Marcelo Antonialli, and
Alessandra Gomes. 2021. Fighting hate speech, si-
lencing drag queens? artiﬁcial intelligence in con-
tent moderation and risks to lgbtq voices online. Sex-
uality & Culture, 25(2):700–732.
201

Desmond Patton, Philipp Blandfort, William Frey,
Michael Gaskell, and Svebor Karaman. 2019. An-
notating social media data from vulnerable popula-
tions: Evaluating disagreement between domain ex-
perts and graduate student annotators. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences.
John Pavlopoulos, Jeffrey Sorensen, Lucas Dixon,
Nithum Thain, and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2020.
Toxicity Detection: Does Context Really Matter? In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 4296–
4305, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani,
and Mark Diaz. 2021.
On Releasing Annotator-
Level Labels and Information in Datasets. In Pro-
ceedings of The Joint 15th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop (LAW) and 3rd Designing Meaning Repre-
sentations (DMR) Workshop, pages 133–138, Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Farzana Rashid, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy, Ed-
uardo Blanco, and Fernando Vega-Redondo. 2020.
Helpful or hierarchical? predicting the communica-
tive strategies of chat participants, and their impact
on success. In EMNLP| Findings. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Maarten Sap, Dallas Card, Saadia Gabriel, Yejin Choi,
and Noah A. Smith. 2019. The Risk of Racial Bias
in Hate Speech Detection.
In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 1668–1678, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Laura Vianna,
Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. 2021.
Annotators with Attitudes:
How Annotator Be-
liefs And Identities Bias Toxic Language Detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07997.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Kandrea Wade, Caitlin
Lustig, and Jed R Brubaker. 2020.
How We’ve
Taught Algorithms to See Identity: Constructing
Race and Gender in Image Databases for Facial
Analysis.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 4(CSCW1):1–35.
Tones Smith. 2012. Pathology, bias and queer diagno-
sis: a crip queer consciousness.
Yujian Sun, Ying Li, and Tingxuan Zhao. 2021. The
improved neural network model in humor detection
with traditional humor theory.
In 2021 Interna-
tional Conference on Communications, Information
System and Computer Engineering (CISCE), pages
549–554. IEEE.
Salome Viljoen. 2021. A relational theory of data gov-
ernance. Yale LJ, 131:573.
Zeerak Waseem, Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017.
Understanding Abuse:
A Typology of Abusive Language Detection Sub-
tasks. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abu-
sive Language Online, pages 78–84, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Max Weber. 2019. Economy and society. In Economy
and society. Harvard University Press.
Leila Weitzel, Ronaldo Cristiano Prati, and Raul Freire
Aguiar. 2016. The comprehension of ﬁgurative lan-
guage: What is the inﬂuence of irony and sarcasm
on NLP techniques? In Sentiment analysis and on-
tology engineering, pages 49–74. Springer.
202
