Received June 22, 2016, accepted July 14, 2016, date of publication August 24, 2016, date of current version September 28, 2016.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2594194
A Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm
Detection on Twitter
MONDHER BOUAZIZI AND TOMOAKI OTSUKI (OHTSUKI), (Senior Member, IEEE)
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan
Corresponding author: M. Bouazizi (bouazizi@ohtsuki.ics.keio.ac.jp)
ABSTRACT Sarcasm is a sophisticated form of irony widely used in social networks and microblogging
websites. It is usually used to convey implicit information within the message a person transmits. Sarcasm
might be used for different purposes, such as criticism or mockery. However, it is hard even for humans to
recognize. Therefore, recognizing sarcastic statements can be very useful to improve automatic sentiment
analysis of data collected from microblogging websites or social networks. Sentiment Analysis refers to the
identiﬁcation and aggregation of attitudes and opinions expressed by Internet users toward a speciﬁc topic.
In this paper, we propose a pattern-based approach to detect sarcasm on Twitter. We propose four sets of
features that cover the different types of sarcasm we deﬁned. We use those to classify tweets as sarcastic and
non-sarcastic. Our proposed approach reaches an accuracy of 83.1% with a precision equal to 91.1%. We also
study the importance of each of the proposed sets of features and evaluate its added value to the classiﬁcation.
In particular, we emphasize the importance of pattern-based features for the detection of sarcastic statements.
INDEX TERMS Twitter, sentiment analysis, sarcasm detection, machine learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Twitter became one of the biggest web destinations for
people to express their opinions, share their thoughts and
report real-time events, etc. Throughout the previous years,
Twitter content continued to increase, thus constituting a
typical example of the so-called big data. Today, according
to its ofﬁcial website,1 Twitter has more than 288 million
active users, and more than 500 million tweets are sent every
day. Many companies and organizations have been interested
in these data for the purpose of studying the opinion of
people towards political events [1], popular products [2] or
movies [3].
However, due to the informal language used in Twitter and
the limitation in terms of characters (i.e., 140 characters per
tweet), understanding the opinions of users and performing
such analysis is quite difﬁcult. Furthermore, presence of
sarcasm makes the task even more challenging: sarcasm is
when a person says something different from what he means.
Liebrecht et al. [10] discussed how sarcasm can be a polarity-
switcher, and Maynard and Greenwood [11] proposed a set of
rules to decide on the polarity of the tweet (i.e., whether it is
positive or negative) when sarcasm is detected.
1http://about.twitter.com/company/
The online Oxford dictionary2 deﬁnes sarcasm as ‘‘the use
of irony to make or convey contempt’’. Collins dictionary3
deﬁnes it as ‘‘mocking, contemptuous, or ironic language
intended to convey scorn or insult’’. However, sarcasm is a
deeper concept, highly related to the language, and to the
common knowledge.
Although different from one another, sarcasm and irony
have been studied as two close and very correlated con-
cepts [4]–[6] or even as the same one [7]–[9]. The Free Dictio-
nary4 also deﬁnes sarcasm as a form of irony that is intended
to express contempt. Since most of the focus on sarcasm is to
enhance and reﬁne the existing automatic sentiment analysis
systems, we also use the two terms synonymously.
Some people are more sarcastic than others, however, in
general, sarcasm is very common, though, difﬁcult to rec-
ognize. In general, people employ sarcasm in their daily life
not only to make jokes and be humorous but also to criticize
or make remarks about ideas, persons or events. Therefore,
it tends to be widely used in social networks, in particu-
lar microblogging websites such as Twitter. That being the
case, the state of the art approaches of sentiment analysis
2http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/
3http://www.collinsdictionary.com/
4https://www.thefreedictionary.com
VOLUME 4, 2016
2169-3536 
 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5477

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
and opinion mining tend to have lower performances when
analyzing data collected from such websites. Maynard and
Greenwood [11] show that sentiment analysis performance
might be highly enhanced when sarcasm within the sarcastic
statements is identiﬁed. Therefore, the need for an efﬁcient
way to detect sarcasm arises.
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient way to detect sar-
castic tweet. Although it does not need an already-built user
knowledge base as in the work of Rajadesingan et al. [12],
our approach considers the different types of sarcasm and
detect the sarcastic tweets regardless of their owners or their
temporal context, with a precision that reaches 91.1%.
Therefore, the main contributions of this paper are as
follows:
1) We identify the main purposes for which sarcasm is
used in social networks.
2) We propose an efﬁcient way to detect sarcastic tweets,
and study how to use this information (i.e., whether the
tweet is sarcastic or not) to enhance the accuracy of
sentiment analysis.
3) We study the added value of the different sets of
features used, in particular, in terms of precision of
detection.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II presents our motivation for this work and
Section III describes some state of the art work related to
our proposed approach. Section IV describes our proposed
approach for sarcasm detection. In section V we present and
discuss the obtained results of the approach, and Section VI
concludes this work.
II. MOTIVATIONS
As mentioned above, the identiﬁcation of sarcasm helps
enhancing sentiment analysis task when performed on
microblogging websites such as Twitter. Sentiment analysis
and opinion mining rely on emotional words in a text to detect
its polarity (i.e., whether it deals ‘‘positively’’ or ‘‘negatively’’
with its theme). However, the appearance of the text might
be misleading. A typical example of that is when the text is
sarcastic. In Twitter, such sarcastic texts are very common.
‘‘All your products are incredibly amazing!!!’’ might be con-
sidered as a compliment. However, considering the following
tweet ‘‘Did I say incredibly?? Well, it’s true, nobody would
believe that. They break the second day you buy them -_-’’,
the user explicitly explains that he did not mean what
he said. Although some users indicate they are being
sarcastic, most of them do not. Therefore, it might be
indispensable to ﬁnd a way to automatically detect any
sarcastic messages.
Through their work, Rajadesingan et al. [12] highlighted
the limitations of some state of the art tools that perform
sentiment analysis, when more sophisticated forms of speech
such as sarcasm are present. They explained why sarcasm is
hard to detect even by humans, and showed how the nature of
tweets makes it even more complicated. Therefore arise the
importance of detection of sarcastic utterances in Twitter.
However, several challenges arise and make the task com-
plicated. Joshi et al. [13] highlighted 3 main challenges which
are i) the identiﬁcation of common knowledge, ii) the intent
to redicule, and iii) the speaker-listener (or reader in the case
of written text) context.
On a related context, even though Brown [4] stated that
sarcasm ‘‘is not a discrete logical or linguistic phenomenon’’,
works such as [8] and [9] were proposed to identify sarcastic
writing patterns to decide on whether or not an utterance is
sarcastic. During our experiments as well as while manually
annotating tweets, we noticed that such patterns exist, in
particular among non-native speakers of English. Therefore,
we focus on detecting and collecting such patterns from a
manually annotated dataset, and we quantify them so that
we can judge whether or not a given tweet is sarcastic by
comparing patterns extracted from it to them.
Throughout
this
work,
we
present
a
pattern-based
framework that performs the task of sarcasm detection,
a framework relatively easy to implement, and that presents
performances competitive to those of more complex ones.
III. RELATED WORK
In the last few years, more attention has been given to Twitter
sentiment analysis by researchers, and a number of recent
papers have been addressed to the classiﬁcation of tweets.
However, the nature of the classiﬁcation and the features
used vary depending on the aim. Sriram et al. [14] used
non-context-related features such as the presence of slangs,
time-event phrases, opinioned words, and the Twitter user
information to classify tweets into a predeﬁned set of generic
classes including events, opinions, deals, and private mes-
sages. Akcora et al. [15] proposed a method to identify the
emotional pattern and the word pattern in Twitter data to
determine the changes in public opinion over the time. They
implemented a dynamic scoring function based on Jaccard’s
similarity [16] of two successive intervals of words and used it
to identify the news that led to breakpoints in public opinion.
However, most of the works focused on the content of
tweets and were conducted to classify tweets based on
the sentiment polarity of the users towards speciﬁc topics.
A variety of features was proposed. Not only they include
the frequency and presence of unigrams, bigrams, adjectives,
etc. [17], but they also include non-textual features such as
emoticons [18] (i.e., facial expressions such as smile or frown
that are formed by typing a sequence of keyboard symbols,
and that are usually used to convey the writer’s sentiment,
emotion or intended tone) and slangs [19]. Dong et al. [20]
proposed a target-dependent classiﬁcation framework which
learns to propagate the sentiments of words towards the target
depending on context and syntactic structure.
Sarcasm, on the other hand, and irony in general have
been used by people in their daily conversations for a long
time. Therefore, sarcasm has been subject to deep studies
form psychological [21] and even neurobiological [22] per-
spectives. Nevertheless, it has been studied as a linguistic
behavior characterizing the human being [12]. In this context,
5478
VOLUME 4, 2016

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
researchers have recently been interested in sarcasm, trying
to ﬁnd ways to automatically detect it when it is present in
a statement. Although some studies such as [4] highlighted
that, unlike irony, sarcasm ‘‘is not a discrete logical or
linguistic phenomenon’’, many works have been proposed
and present high accuracy and precision.
Burfoot and Baldwin [23] introduced the task of ﬁltering
satirical news articles from true newswire documents. They
introduced a set of features including the use of profanity and
slangs and what they qualiﬁed of ‘‘semantic validity’’; and
used Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer to recognize
satire articles.
Campbell and Katz [24] studied the contextual components
utilized to convey sarcastic verbal irony and proposed that
sarcasm requires the presence of four entities: allusion to
failed expectation, pragmatic insincerity, negative tension and
presence of a victim, as well as stylistic components.
Nevertheless, other works have been proposed to represent
sarcasm. Some of these representations are given in [13] as
follows:
• Wilson [25] suggested that sarcasm arises when there is
a situational disparity between the text and the context.
• Ivanko and Pexman [26] suggested that sarcasm requires
a 6-tuple consisting of a speaker, a listener, a context, an
utterance, a literal proposition and intended proposition.
• Giora [27] suggested that sarcasm is a form of negation
in which an explicit negation marker is lacking. This
implies that the sarcasm is namely a polarity-shifter.
As for the task of detection itself, several goals were
deﬁned. Tepperman et al. [28] studied the occurrence of
the expression ‘‘yeah right!’’, and whether it appears in
a sarcastic context or not. They proposed an approach to
automatically detect sarcasm present in spoken dialogues,
using prosodic, spectral and contextual cues. However, this
represents the main shortcoming for their approach: absence
of such components makes it impossible to detect sarcasm.
In other words, although the approach itself is very effec-
tive in detecting when a speciﬁc expression is sarcastic,
this approach is unable to detect all types of sarcasm that
might occur. Veale and Hao [29] annotated the occurrences
of similes such as ‘‘as cool as a cucumber’’ into ironic or
not. This works presents the same shortcoming as that of
Tepperman et al. [28]. Barbieri et al. [30] proposed to
classify texts into politics, humor, irony and sarcasm.
Ghosh et al. [31] formulated the task of sarcasm detec-
tion as a sense disambiguation task where a word can have
a literal sense or a sarcastic one, and therefore, through
detecting the sense of the word, sarcasm can be detected.
Wang et al. [32] suggested that, rather than trying to detect
whether a tweet is sarcastic or not, it makes more sense to
take into account the context: they modeled the problem as
a sequential classiﬁcation task. However, most of the works
simply aim to classify a set of texts as sarcastic and non-
sarcastic.
Davidov et al. [9] and Tsur et al. [8] proposed a semi-
supervised sarcasm identiﬁcation algorithm. They experi-
mented on two data sets: one from amazon and the other
from Twitter. The results they obtained were interesting,
though their approach relies on the frequency of appearance
of words which might be misleading if the training set is not
balanced in terms of topics it deals with or if the data are not
big enough. In addition, the approach treats what is called
‘‘Context Words’’ in the same way regardless of their gram-
matical function. It also does not make difference between
sentimental words and non sentimental words. Patterns that
do not consider the emotional content of words, or discard
some emotional words because of their low presence might
reduce the potential of the approach.
Maynard and Greenwood [11] relied on hashtags that
Twitter users employ in their tweets to identify sarcasm in
Twitter. They also studied how the detection of sarcasm
can highly enhance the sentiment analysis of tweets, and
proposed a rule to decide on the polarity of the tweet
(i.e., whether it is positive or negative) depending on the
apparent sentiment of the tweet and the content of the hashtag.
Riloff et al. [33] proposed a method to detect a speciﬁc
type of sarcasm, where a positive sentiment contrasts with a
negative situation. They introduced a bootstrapping algorithm
that uses the single seed word ‘‘love’’ and a collection of
sarcastic tweets to automatically detect and learn expressions
showing positive sentiment and phrases citing negative situa-
tions. Their approach shows some potentials. However, most
of the sarcastic tweets in Twitter do not fall in the aforemen-
tioned category of sarcasm. In addition, the approach relies
on the existence of the all possible ‘‘negative situations’’ on
the training set, which makes it less efﬁcient when dealing
with new tweets.
Rajadesingan et al. [12] went deeper and dealt with the
psychology behind sarcasm. They introduced a behavioral
modeling for detecting sarcasm in Twitter. They identi-
ﬁed different forms of sarcasm and their manifestation in
Twitter, and demonstrated the importance of historical infor-
mation collected from the past tweets for sarcasm detection.
Although, it has proven to be very efﬁcient, the approach is
less performant when there is no previous knowledge about
the user. Most of the features extracted rely on data collected
from previous tweets to judge. For a realtime stream of
tweets, where random users are posting tweets, it is hard to
run the approach, the size of the knowledge-base grows very
fast, and the training should be redone each time based on the
new tweets collected (i.e., since the previous tweet has the
highest impact on the current one, the new tweet should be
taken into consideration for the next iteration).
Muresan et al. [34] proposed a method to construct a corpus
of sarcastic Twitter messages, where the author of the tweet
provides the information whether or not a tweet is sarcastic.
Throughout their work, they investigated the impact of lexical
and pragmatic factors on machine learning performance to
identify and detect sarcastic tweets and ranked the features
according to their contribution to the classiﬁcation.
Fersini et al. [35] introduced a Bayesian Model Averag-
ing ensemble that takes into account different classiﬁers,
VOLUME 4, 2016
5479

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
according to their reliability and their marginal probability
predictions to make a voting system more sophisticated than
the conventional majority voting one.
Bharti et al. [36] proposed two approaches for detecting
sarcastic tweets: the ﬁrst one is a parsing-based lexicon
generation algorithm and the second one uses the occurrences
of interjection words.
In general, and based on the method and features used,
we can classify these works into 3 categories:
• Rule-based approaches such as the work of Maynard
and Greenwood [11] and that of Ghosh et al. [31],
• Semi-supervised
approaches
such
as
the
works
proposed
by
Tsur
et
al.
[8],
that
proposed
by
Davidov et al. [9] and that proposed by Bharti et al. [36],
• Supervised
approaches
such
as
the
work
of
Muresan et al. [34], that of Wang et al. [32] and that
of Rajadesingan et al. [12].
As for the features used in the supervised approaches they fall
mainly into 3 sets:
• n-gram-based features, which have been used along
with other features in the majority of the works such as
the works of Barbieri et al. [30], Riloff et al. [33] and
that of Ghosh et al. [31],
• Sentiment-based features such as the works of
Reyes et al. [37], [38] and Joshi et al. [39],
• Saracstic pattern-based features such as the works of
Tsur et al. [8], Davidov et al. [9] and Riloff et al. [33], etc.
Other works added the contextual features to enhance the
classiﬁcation, whether the context is the historical context as
in [12], the conversation context as in [39] and [40] or the
topical context as in [32].
In our work, we opt for a supervised approach that learns
sarcastic patterns extracted based on the part-of-speech (PoS)
of words used.
IV. PROPOSED APPROACH
Given a set of tweets, we aim to classify each one of them
depending on whether it is sarcastic or not. Therefore, from
each tweet, we extract a set of features, refer to a training set
and use machine learning algorithms to perform the classiﬁ-
cation. The features are extracted in a way that makes use
of different components of the tweet, and covers different
types of sarcasm. The set of tweets on which we run our
experiments is checked and annotated manually.
A. DATA
Throughout the period ranging from December 2014 to
March 2015, we collected tweets, using Twitter’s stream-
ing API. To collect sarcastic tweets, we queried the API
for tweets containing the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’. Although
Liebrecht et al. [10] concluded in their work that this hashtag
is not the best way to collect sarcastic tweets, other works
such as [9] highlighted the fact that this hashtag can be
used for this purpose. However, they also concluded that the
hashtag cannot be reliable and is used mainly for 3 purposes:
• to serve as a search anchor,
• to serve as a sarcasm marker in case of a very subtle
sarcasm where it is very hard to get the sarcasm without
an explicit marker, as in ‘‘Today was fun. The ﬁrst time
since weeks! #Sarcasm’’,
• to clarify the presence of sarcasm in a previous tweet, as
in ‘‘I forgot to add #sarcasm so people like you get it!’’.
In total, we collected 58 609 tweets with the hashtag ‘‘#sar-
casm’’, which we cleaned up by removing the noisy and
irrelevant ones, as well as ones where the use of the hashtag
does fall into one of the two ﬁrst uses of the three described
above.
As for non-sarcastic tweets, we collected tweets dealing
with different topics and made sure they have some emotional
content.
We prepared 3 data sets for our work as follow:
• Set 1: this set contains 6000 tweets, half of them are sar-
castic, and the other half are not. The tweets on this data
set are manually checked and classiﬁed depending on
their level of sarcasm from 1 (highly non-sarcastic) to 6
(highly sarcastic). The manual annotation is done by two
people with no background about the tweets or the users
who posted them. They have been asked to attribute the
scores. It is important to note that the manual labelling
is subject to the annotators’ own opinion. Therefore, it
is taken into account that the classiﬁcation is not per-
fect. However, a sarcastic tweet is never labeled as non-
sarcastic, and vice versa. This set contains a trustworthy
knowledge base that can be used to train our model.
Tweets having level of sarcasm equal to 3 are mostly
ones that, without the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’, are very
close those of level 4 or 5. In other terms, it is very hard
for a human, with no background about the tweet, to tell
whether it is sarcastic or not. The hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’
has not been removed yet when the annotation is done.
This ﬁrst set is used to train our model. Therefore, in the
rest of this work, it will be referred to as the ‘‘training
set’’. The number of sarcasm levels is also referred to as
NS and is equal to 6.
• Set 2: this set contains 1128 sarcastic tweets, and 1128
non-sarcastic ones. Sarcastic tweets are collected as
described above (i.e., by querying Twitter API). Yet, no
manual check is done, which makes it a very noisy data
set. However, to reduce the noise, we ﬁltered-out the
non-english tweets, very short tweets (i.e., that have less
than 3 words), and those which contain URLs. In most
of the cases, URLs refer to photo links. We believe that
part of the sarcasm is included in the photo, therefore
we discard them. This data set is used during our exper-
imenting process to optimize the parameters we deﬁned
for our features. In the rest of this work, we will refer to
this set as the ‘‘optimization set’’.
• Set 3: this set contains 500 sarcastic tweets, and
500 non-sarcastic ones. All tweets are manually checked
and classiﬁed as sarcastic and non-sarcastic. This set
will serve as a test set, and will be used to evaluate
5480
VOLUME 4, 2016

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
the performances of our proposed approach. Therefore,
in the rest of this work, it will be referred to as the
‘‘test set’’.
None of the tweets of any of the aforementioned sets is
re-used in another. In addition, during our work, we removed
the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’ from all the tweets.
B. TOOLS
To perform the different Natural Language Processing (NLP)
taks (e.g., tokenisation, lemmatization, etc.), we used Apache
OpenNLP.5 However, OpenNLP PoS tagger performs poorly
with the given model to tag tweets, due to the irrelevant
content and the use of slangs, etc., we used Gate Twitter part-
of-speech tagger [41]. This PoS-tagger reaches an accuracy
of 90.5% on Twitter data.
To perform the classiﬁcation, we used the toolkit
weka [42] which presents a variety of classiﬁers. We used
libsvm [43] to perform the classiﬁcation using Support Vector
Machine (SVM).
C. FEATURES EXTRACTION
Being a sophisticated form of speech, sarcasm is used for
different purposes. While annotating the data, the annotators
concluded that these purposes fall mostly, but not totally,
in three categories: sarcasm as wit, sarcasm as whimper and
sarcasm as avoidance.
• Sarcasm as wit: when used as a wit, sarcasm is used
with the purpose of being funny; the person employs
some special forms of speeches, tends to exaggerate,
or uses a tone that is different from that when he talks
usually to make it easy to recognize. In social networks,
voice tones are converted into special forms of writing:
use of capital letter words, exclamation and question
marks, as well as some sarcasm-related emoticons.
• Sarcasm as whimper: when used as whimper, sarcasm
is employed to show how annoyed or angry the person
is. Therefore, it tempts to show how bad the situation
is by using exaggeration or by employing very positive
expressions to describe a negative situation.
• Sarcasm as evasion: it refers to the situation when the
person wants to avoid giving a clear answer, thus, makes
use of sarcasm. In this case, the person employs com-
plicated sentences, uncommon words and some unusual
expressions.
Unlike [44], which classiﬁes sarcasm into 4 different types
based on how sentiments appear in the text, the observations
and classiﬁcation are done based on why sarcasm is used.
Although theses observations are likely to be biased and
depend on the annotator’s own opinions, we rely on these
assumptions to build our model. During our work, we rely
mainly on writing patterns to detect sarcastic statements;
however, other features are extracted and that help to obtain
higher classiﬁcation precision and accuracy. The distinction
of purposes highlights the use of some features as we will
describe next.
5https://opennlp.apach.org
Four families of features are extracted: sentiment-related
features, punctuation-related features, syntactic and semantic
features, and pattern features.
1) SENTIMENT-RELATED FEATURES
A very popular type of sarcasm that is widely used in both
regular conversations as well as short messages such as
tweets, is when an emotionally positive expression is used
in a negative context. A similar way to express sarcasm is to
use expressions having contradictory sentiments. This type of
sarcasm we qualiﬁed as ‘‘whimper’’ is very common in social
networks and microblogging websites. Riloff et al. [33] show
that this type of sarcasm can be identiﬁed and detected when
a positive statement, usually a verb or a phrasal verb, is col-
located with a negative situation (e.g., ‘‘I love being ignored
all the time’’). They built a lexicon-based approach that learns
the possible positive expressions and negative situations and
used it to detect such contrast in unknown tweets. However,
learning all possible negative situations requires a big and rich
source and might be infeasible because negative situations are
unpredictable.
In our work, we opt for a more straight-forward, yet more
general approach. We consider any kind of inconsistency
between sentiments of words as well as other components
within the tweet. Therefore, to identify and quantify such
inconsistency, we extract sentimental components of the
tweet and count them. For this purpose, we maintain two
lists of words qualiﬁed as ‘‘positive words’’ and ‘‘negative
words’’. The two lists contain respectively words that have
positive emotional content (e.g., ‘‘love’’, ‘‘happy’’, etc.) and
negative emotional content (e.g., ‘‘hate’’, ‘‘sad’’, etc.). The
two lists of words are created using SentiStrength6 database.
This database contains a list of emotional words, where neg-
ative words have scores varying from −1 (almost negative)
to −5 (extremely negative) and positive words have score
varying from 1 (almost positive) to 5 (extremely positive).
Using these two lists, we extract two features we denote
respectively pw and nw by counting the number of positive
and negative words in the tweet.
TABLE 1. PoS-tags for words considered as highly emotional.
Adjectives, verbs and adverbs have higher emotional con-
tent than nouns [45]; therefore positive and negative words
that have the associated PoS-tag, shown in TABLE 1, are
counted again and used to create two more features that
we denote PW and NW and which represent the number
of highly emotional positive words and highly emotional
negative words.
6http://sentistrength.wlv.ac.uk
VOLUME 4, 2016
5481

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
We then add three more features by counting the number
of positive, negative and sarcastic emoticons. Sarcastic emoti-
cons are emoticons used sometimes with sarcastic or ironical
statements (e.g., ‘‘:P’’). These emoticons are used sometimes
when the person is trying to be funny or to show that he is just
making a joke (i.e., when sarcasm is used as wit).
Hashtags also have emotional content. In some cases, they
are used to disambiguate the real intention of the Twitter user
conveyed in his message. For example, the hashtag employed
in the following tweet: ‘‘Thank you very much for being there
for me #ihateyou’’ tells that the user does not really want to
thank the addressee, he was rather blaming him for not being
there for him. Therefore, we count also the number of positive
and negative hashtags.
In addition to the aforementioned features, we extract
features related to the contrast between these sentimental
components. We ﬁrst calculate the ratio of emotional words
ρ(t) deﬁned as
ρ(t) = (δ · PW + pw) −(δ · NW + nw)
(δ · PW + pw) + (δ · NW + nw)
(1)
where t is the tweet, pw, PW, nw and NW denote respectively
the number of positive words (other than highly emotional
ones), that of highly emotional positive words, that of neg-
ative words (other than highly emotional ones) and that of
highly emotional words. δ is a weight bigger than 1 given to
the highly emotional words. In case the tweet does not contain
any emotional word, ρ is set to 0. In the rest of this work,
δ is set to 3.
We then deﬁne 4 features that represent whether there
is a contrast between the different components. By contrast
we mean the coexistence of a negative component and a
positive one within the same tweet. We check the existence
of such contrast between words, between hashtags, between
words and hashtags and between words and emoticons and
use these information as extra features. The ﬁnal sentiment-
related feature vector has 14 features.
2) PUNCTUATION-RELATED FEATURES
Sentiment-related features are not enough to detect all kinds
of sarcasm that might be present. In addition, they do not
make use of all the components of the tweet. Therefore, more
features are to be extracted. As mentioned before, sarcasm is
a sophisticated form of speech: not only it plays with words
and meanings, but also it employs behavioral aspects such
as low tones [47], [48], facial gestures [49] or exaggeration.
These aspects are translated into a certain use of punctuation
or repetition of vowels when the message is written. To detect
such aspects, we extract a set of features that we qualify as
punctuation-related features. For each tweet, we calculate the
following values:
• Number of exclamation marks
• Number of question marks
• Number of dots
• Number of all-capital words
• Number of quotes
We also add a sixth feature by checking if any of the
words contains a vowel that is repeated more than twice
(e.g., ‘‘looooove’’). If such a word exists, the feature is set
to ‘‘true’’, otherwise, it is set to ‘‘false’’.
The ‘‘excessive’’ use of exclamation marks or question
marks, or the repetition of a vowel, particularly in an emo-
tional word, might reﬂect a certain tone that the user intends
to show, however, this tone is not always sarcastic. We believe
that these features can be highly correlated with the number
of words in the tweet. Some very short tweets which end with
many exclamation marks might show surprise rather than
sarcasm. Following two examples of tweets in which the use
of exclamation marks has two different use cases:
• ‘‘Thank you @laur3en, it was amazing !!!’’
• ‘‘Thanks for another amazing day with your amazing
boyfriend!!!!’’
In the ﬁrst case, the exclamation marks are used to show
sincere feelings of gratitude. However, in the second, the
exclamation marks serve as an indication of annoyance;
the user has no real intension to thank his friend. Although the
use of exclamation is not relevant in itself and might not show
whether the user is expressing sarcasm or any other emotion;
combined with other features, this feature is expected to add
value to the classiﬁcation. We then deﬁne one last feature
by counting the number of words in the tweet. In total,
7 punctuation-based features are extracted.
3) SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC FEATURES
Along with the punctuation-related features, some common
expressions are used usually in a sarcastic context. It is
possible to correlate these expressions with the punctuation
to decide whether what is said is sarcastic or not. Besides,
in other cases, people tend to make complicated sentences
or use uncommon words to make it ambiguous to the lis-
tener/reader to get a clear answer. This is common when
sarcasm is used as ‘‘evasion’’, where the person’s purpose is
to hide his real feeling or opinion by using sarcasm. Hence,
we extract the following features that reﬂects these aspects:
• Use of uncommon words
• Number of uncommon words
• Existence of common sarcastic expressions
• Number of interjections
• Number of laughing expressions
In particular, the feature ‘‘Existence of common sarcastic
expression’’ is extracted in the same way we extract the
features qualiﬁed as ‘‘pattern-related’’ (this will be described
in detail in the next subsection). Here we used a noisy set
of 3000 tweets having the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’ (the set has
been discarded later and has not been used neither for training
nor for test). We extracted all possible patterns of length
varying from 3 to 6, we selected the patterns that appeared
more than 10 times. Being few in number, we manually
checked the list and removed the irrelevant ones. We obtained
a list of 13 main patterns including [love PRONOUN when]
(e.g., ‘‘I love it when I am called at 4 a.m. because my
5482
VOLUME 4, 2016

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
neighbour’s kid can’t sleep!’’), [PRONOUN be ADVERB
funny] (e.g., ‘‘You are incredibly funny -_-’’), etc.
4) PATTERN-RELATED FEATURES
The patterns selected in the previous subsection, and qualiﬁed
of ‘‘common sarcastic expression’’ are very common, even in
spoken language. However, their number is small, they are
not unique and most of the tweets in both our training and test
sets do not contain them. That being the case, we dig further
and extract another set of features. The idea of our pattern-
related features is inspired from the work of Davidov et al. [9].
In his approach, the author classiﬁed words into two cate-
gories: high-frequency words and content words based on
their frequency of appearance in his data set and deﬁned a
pattern as an ‘‘ordered sequence of high frequency words and
slots for content words’’. This approach, although it has some
potential to detect sarcasm, presents many shortcomings as
shown in Section III.
TABLE 2. Expressions used to replace the words of GFI.
Therefore, we propose more efﬁcient and reliable patterns.
We divide words into two classes: a ﬁrst one referred to as
‘‘CI’’ containing words of which the content is important and
a second one referred to as ‘‘GFI’’ containing the words of
which the grammatical function is more important. If a word
belongs to the ﬁrst category, it is lemmatized; otherwise, it is
replaced it by a certain expression. The expressions used to
replace these words are shown in TABLE 2. The classiﬁcation
into classes is done based on the part of speech tag of the word
in the tweet. The list of part-of-speech tags, their meaning and
to which category we classify them is given in TABLE 3.
We generate the vector of words for each tweet accord-
ing to the rule deﬁned. For example, the following PoS-
tagged tweet ‘‘@gilbert:_NN you_PRP are_VBP crazy_JJ
,_, who_WP told_VBD you_PRP I_PRP want_VBP to_TO
drink_VB with_IN you_PRP !!!!_.’’ gives, the following pat-
tern vector [NOUN PRONOUN be crazy who tell PRO-
NOUN PRONOUN want to drink with PRONOUN.]
We deﬁne a pattern as an ordered sequence of words. The
patterns are extracted from the training set and are taken such
as their length satisﬁes
LMin ≤Length(pattern) ≤LMax
(2)
where LMin and LMax represent the minimal and maximal
allowed length of patterns in words and Length(pattern) is the
TABLE 3. Part-of-speech tag classes.
length of the pattern in words. The number of pattern lengths
is NL = (LMax −LMin + 1). Therefore, from the example
mentioned above, we can extract the following patterns:
- [NOUN PRONOUN be crazy]
- [PRONOUN be crazy]
- [be crazy who tell PRONOUN PRONOUN want to]
- etc.
Only patterns that appear at least Nocc times in our training
set are kept; the others are discarded. In the rest of this work,
Nocc is set to 2: the value 1 gives lower accuracy and precision
and higher values decrease remarkably the number of pat-
terns, and consequently presents lower accuracy. In addition,
a pattern that appears in a sarcastic tweet and in a non-
sarcastic tweet is discarded. This step is done to ﬁlter out
patterns that are not related to sarcasm. After the selection,
we divide the resulted patterns into NF sets, where
NF = NL × NS.
(3)
We create NF features, as shown in TABLE 4. Each feature Fij
of the table represents the degree of resemblance of the tweet
to the patterns of degree of sarcasm i and length j. Therefore,
given a tweet t, we calculate the resemblance degree res(p, t)
VOLUME 4, 2016
5483

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
TABLE 4. Pattern features.
of each pattern in the training set p to the tweet t, deﬁned as:
res(p, t)
=



1,
if the tweet vector contains the pattern as
it is, in the same order,
α · n/N,
if n words out of the N words of the pattern
appear in the tweet in the correct order,
0,
if no word of the pattern appears in the
tweet.
Given Nij the number of patterns collected from the training
set having a sarcasm degree i and a length j, the value of the
feature Fij is
Fij = βj ∗
K
X
k=1
res(pk, t)
(4)
where βj is a weight given to patterns of length Lj (regardless
of their level of sarcasm). We give different weights for each
length of pattern since longer patterns are more likely to
have higher impact. Fij as deﬁned measures the degree of
resemblance of a tweet t to patterns of level of sarcasm i and
length j. K in our work is set to 5, and represents the K closest
patterns among the Nij ones described above.
Extension of the training set patterns: Being relatively
small in size (i.e., only 6000 tweets), our training set cannot
cover all possible sarcastic patterns. Therefore, we enrich it
to obtain more patterns. We collected 18 959 tweets contain-
ing the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’ and 18 959 tweets that do not.
We checked if the tweets having the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’
contain any of the sarcastic patterns we already extracted
from the training set and that have a length equal to or more
than 4. If that is the case, we extract the different patterns
from the tweet and add them to the list of patterns of the
training set keeping in mind the rule we made for the selection
of patterns (i.e., if the pattern exists in a non-sarcastic tweet,
it is discarded). Although the added tweets are not as reliable
as those of the initial training set, we believe that ﬁltering
the tweets that contain at least one pattern that is identical
to a reliable one is reliable enough given it already contains
the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’. We then did the same to the non
sarcastic tweet. Thus, we enriched our data set with more
patterns. This step has been done only to get more patterns,
therefore, none of the other families of features is concerned
by the enrichment.
Pattern-related features as deﬁned give a high ﬂexibility to
optimize depending on their contribution. In total we have the
following parameters to optimize:
• LMin and LMax
• α
• β1, . . . , βNL
To optimize LMin and LMax, we ﬁxed α and βi (i = 1, NL)
as follow and tried different values of pattern lengths:
(
α = 0.1,
β1 = · · · = βNL = 1.0.
FIGURE 1. Accuracy per pattern length for fixed values of α, β1, . . . , βNL.
We ran a ﬁrst simulation on our training set (6000 tweets)
and optimization set (2256 tweets), for each pattern length.
We obtained the results shown in Fig. 1. The results present
the accuracy of the classiﬁcation of tweets as sarcastic and
non-sarcastic. The obtained results show that the patterns
having a length are from 4 to 10 give the highest accuracy
(i.e., more than 75% accuracy during 10-folds cross vali-
dation). Pattern length 3 gives the highest accuracy on our
optimization set. Given that the average number of words per
tweet is equal to 11.48, we set the parameters LMin and LMax
respectively to 3 and 10.
Afterwards, we set MinLength and MaxLength as mentioned,
kept the values of β1, . . . , βNL as they are (i.e., equal to 1).
We tried different values of α. We ran different simulations on
the same data sets using pattern features, for different values
of α. Results of the test are given in Fig. 2.
FIGURE 2. Accuracy of classification for different values of α.
The accuracy of classiﬁcation varies highly depending on
the value of α, that is, the lower the value is, the better the
performances are during the cross validation. This is due to
5484
VOLUME 4, 2016

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
the unicity of the patterns. In other terms, in the training set,
the patterns derived from each tweet will have the highest
score. Thus, the tweet will be classiﬁed as the closest to its
own patterns. However, in the optimization set, the accuracy
is the highest when α ∈{0.01, 0.1}. The optimal accuracy we
obtained was for α = 0.03 as shown in Fig. 2
Finally, for β1, . . . , βNL, we tried different combinations
maintaining the following condition
β1 ≤· · · ≤βNL.
(5)
The observed results are not very different for all the com-
binations we tried although we noticed that the closer the
values to 1, the better the performances are. The optimal
performances we obtained were observed when
βn = n −1
n + 1.
(6)
The ﬁnal values of parameters we set for pattern-related
features are as follow:



Nocc = 2,
LMin = 3,
LMax = 10,
α = 0.03,
βn = (n −1)/(n + 1)
∀n ∈{3, . . . , 10}.
In the next section, we evaluate the model we built and
present the results of our experiments.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Once the features are extracted, we proceed to our experi-
ments. The Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) used to eval-
uate the approach are:
• Accuracy: it represents the overall correctness of clas-
siﬁcation. In other words, it measures the fraction of all
correctly classiﬁed instances over the total number of
instances.
• Precision:
it represents the fraction of retrieved sar-
castic tweets that are relevant. In other words, it mea-
sures the number of tweets that have successfully been
classiﬁed as sarcastic over the total number of tweets
classiﬁed as sarcastic.
• Recall: it represents the fraction of relevant sarcastic
tweets that are retrieved. In other words, it measures the
number of tweets that have successfully been classiﬁed
as sarcastic over the total number of sarcastic tweets.
We ran the classiﬁcation using the classiﬁers ‘‘Random
Forest’’ [46], ‘‘Support Vector Machine’’ (SVM), ‘‘k Near-
est Neighbours’’ (k-NN) and ‘‘Maximum Entropy’’. Table 5
presents the performances of the classiﬁers on the dataset.
The overall accuracy obtained reaches 83.1% using the
classiﬁer Random Forest for an F1-score equal to 81.3%.
This accuracy is obtained when setting the parameters of the
classiﬁer as follows [46]:
• Number of Features: 20
• Number of Trees: 100
TABLE 5. Accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of classification using
different classifiers.
• Seeds: 20
• Max Depth: 0 (unlimited)
SVM, on the other hand, presents a precision equal to
98.1% for a low F1-score equal to 33.8%. This means that
most of the tweets that were classiﬁed as sarcastic are indeed
sarcastic. However, a very few percentage of the sarcastic
tweets were detected (almost 20%). In other words, SVM
is capable of detecting sarcasm with a high precision and
the output can indeed be used to reﬁne sentiment analysis,
however, it does not cover all the sarcastic tweets. In a real
stream of tweets, the number of sarcastic tweets is quite
lower than that in the dataset used; therefore, the results
obtained mean that only one out of ﬁve sarcastic tweets
will be detected. Classiﬁers such as k-NN and Maximum
Entropy present a high accuracy and F1-scores, however, the
performances of Random Forest are the highest. During the
preliminary experiments (i.e., parameters optimization) as
well as for the rest of our analysis, the results used are those
returned by the classiﬁer Random Forest.
FIGURE 3. Accuracy of classification during cross-validation for each
family of features.
A. PERFORMANCES OF EACH SET OF FEATURES
We ﬁrst checked the performances of classiﬁcation of each
set of features apart. Figs. 3 and 4 present the performances
of the different sets of features.
1) DURING CROSS-VALIDATION
Fig. 3 shows the performances of classiﬁcation during cross-
validation. We notice that the performances of the pattern-
related features is very high during cross-validation. This
has been discussed in the previous section: the value of α
as chosen makes each tweet in the training set the closest
to itself. This explains the very good results obtained by
Davidov et al. [9].
VOLUME 4, 2016
5485

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
FIGURE 4. Accuracy of classification of the test for each family of features.
TABLE 6. Ratio of presence of syntax-related features in the training set.
On the other hand, we notice that the syntax-related fea-
tures present a very low accuracy and recall. The features
seem to be not very efﬁcient, if used alone, to classify the
tweets as sarcastic and non-sarcastic. One reason is the low
presence of these features in the data set. TABLE 6 shows
the existence rate of each of the features in the training set.
In addition, due to the informal language used in Twitter and
the noise it has, the PoS-tagger performances are lower than
when applied to a formal text. In particular, the PoS-tagger is
not very efﬁcient to detect interjections, it classiﬁes them in
many cases as nouns. However, the precision given by this set
of features, and which exceeded 65% shows the importance
of such features to detect sarcastic components. It refers to the
number of sarcastic tweets over the number of tweets judged
as sarcastic. Although, they perform poorly, these features
might have higher added value when correlated with other
features, or if their presence is more frequent.
Punctuation-related features and sentiment-related fea-
tures have higher prediction rate. They are more efﬁcient,
though they perform worse than pattern-related features.
They
both
give
an
accuracy
almost
equal
to
60%.
Furthermore, the precision of sentiment-based features is
remarkably higher than the accuracy. In other terms, from the
tweets that have been classiﬁed as sarcastic, the prediction
rate is high. This can be explained by the fact that tweets
having contrasting emotional content are likely to be sarcas-
tic. Thus, if detected, they would be classiﬁed as sarcastic.
2) ON A TEST SET
Fig. 4 shows the performances of classiﬁcation on our test
set. Performance of the classiﬁcation on unknown data is
clearly lower than that during cross-validation. However,
we can notice that the sets of features that have the highest
merit during cross-validation are the same ones that have the
highest merit during the classiﬁcation of test set tweets.
The low accuracy of syntax-related features is due to their
low presence in the test set too. As for Pattern-related fea-
tures, they have higher performances. Accuracy and precision
have very close values. This can be explained by the fact that,
contrarily to sentiment-based features for example, which
check the existence on some characteristics related to sarcasm
in the tweets, patterns are extracted from both sarcastic and
non-sarcastic tweets, and the closeness to these patterns is
checked.
B. OVERALL PERFORMANCES OF THE PROPOSED
APPROACH
Together, the features perform better than each one by itself.
Fig. 5 shows the performance of the proposed approach when
all the features are used.
FIGURE 5. Accuracy of classification using all features during training
set-cross-validation and on the test set.
During cross validation, both the accuracy and precision
are higher than 90%. The recall is lower than 89%. More
interestingly, the accuracy obtained for the test set, before
enrichment of the patterns, exceeds 72% with a precision
higher than 73%. This shows that, if combined, the different
sets of features, perform better. Although our data set con-
tains many sarcastic tweets that are hard to identify even by
humans (we referred to the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’ to classify
them), the accuracy obtained is high. The enrichment pro-
cess added more potential to the approach and increased the
accuracy of the classiﬁcation noticeably. The precision also
increased compared to that without enrichment. It reﬂects
the fact that most of the tweets that have been classiﬁed as
sarcastic really are. Recall, on the other hand, has a lower
value, though still better than before enrichment. It shows
that, many of the sarcastic tweets were not well classiﬁed.
As mentioned before, tweets of sarcasm level 3 are very difﬁ-
cult to be distinguished from the non sarcastic ones, therefore,
we believe that many of the sarcastic tweets that were not
classiﬁed as sarcastic fall in this category. Nevertheless, this
can be enhanced if we use more tweets for enrichment or in
the training set.
To measure the potential of our method, we consider
the approach proposed by Riloff et al. [33] as well as the
n-gram-based approaches as our baseline. In addition to
the aforementioned KPIs, we deﬁne a fourth one, which is
5486
VOLUME 4, 2016

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
the F1 score deﬁned as follow:
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
(7)
It combines the precision and recall, therefore it represents a
more reliable KPI to compare different approaches.
TABLE 7. Performance of the proposed approach compared to the
baseline ones.
The results of the comparison of our approach with the
baseline ones are given by TABLE 7. Our proposed approach
clearly outperforms the baseline ones, for the used data set:
not only it has a higher accuracy and precision, our method’s
F1 score is neatly higher than that of the baseline ones.
Although it performs well when detecting a speciﬁc type of
sarcasm, the approach proposed by Riloff et al. [33], performs
poorly in our data set since most of the sarcastic tweets do
not fall in the type of sarcasm where a positive sentiment
contrasts with a negative situation. This explains the high
precision of that approach and its low recall.
Compared to more sophisticated approaches such as that
proposed by Davidov et al. [9] or Rajadesingan et al. [12],
our approach, although it does not require a big training data
set, or a knowledge base of the users, presents competitive
results. The two approaches were not reimplemented and
run on our data set for the reason that we do not have a
previous knowledge of the users as in [12], nor do we dispose
of 5.9 million tweets to classify words into context words
and highly frequent words as in [9]. However, our proposed
presents an F1 score close to that of the approach [9] which
is 82.7% (on the Twitter data set) and an accuracy close to
that of [12] which is 83.46%.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a new method to detect sarcasm
on Twitter. The proposed method makes use of the differ-
ent components of the tweet. Our approach makes use of
Part-of-Speech tags to extract patterns characterizing the level
of sarcasm of tweets. The approach has shown good results,
though might have even better results if we use a bigger
training set since the patterns we extracted from the current
one might not cover all possible sarcastic patterns.
We also proposed an efﬁcient way to enrich our set
with more sarcastic patterns using an initial training set
of 6000 Tweets, and the hashtag ‘‘#sarcasm’’.
In a future work, we will study how to use the output of
the current one to enhance the performances of sentiment
analysis and opinion mining.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research results have been achieved by ‘‘Cognitive
Security: A New Approach to Securing Future Large Scale
and Distributed Mobile Applications,’’ the Commissioned
Research of National Institute of Information and Commu-
nications Technology, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Soler, F. Cuartero, and M. Roblizo, ‘‘Twitter as a tool for pre-
dicting elections results,’’ in Proc. IEEE/ACM ASONAM, Aug. 2012,
pp. 1194–1200.
[2] S. Homoceanu, M. Loster, C. Loﬁ, and W.-T. Balke, ‘‘Will I like it?
Providing product overviews based on opinion excerpts,’’ in Proc. IEEE
CEC, Sep. 2011, pp. 26–33.
[3] U. R. Hodeghatta, ‘‘Sentiment analysis of Hollywood movies on Twitter,’’
in Proc. IEEE/ACM ASONAM, Aug. 2013, pp. 1401–1404.
[4] R. L. J. Brown, ‘‘The pragmatics of verbal irony,’’ in Language Use and the
Uses of Language. Washington, DC, USA: Georgetown University Press,
1980, pp. 111–127.
[5] S. Attardo, ‘‘Irony as relevant inappropriateness,’’ in Irony in Language
and Thought. New York, NY, USA: Psychology Press, Jun. 2007, pp. 135–
174.
[6] R. W. Gibbs, Jr., and J. O’Brien, ‘‘Psychological aspects of irony under-
standing,’’ J. Pragmatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 523–530, Dec. 1991.
[7] H. Grice, ‘‘Further notes on logic and conversation,’’ in Pragmatics: Syntax
and Semantics. San Diego, CA, USA: Academic, 1978, pp. 113–127.
[8] O. Tsur, D. Davidov, and A. Rappoport, ‘‘ICWSM—A great catchy
name: Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences in online prod-
uct reviews,’’ in Proc. AAAI Conf. Weblogs Soc. Media, May 2010,
pp. 162–169.
[9] D. Davidov, O. Tsur, and A. Rappoport, ‘‘Semi-supervised recognition of
sarcastic sentences in Twitter and Amazon,’’ in Proc. 14th Conf. Comput.
Natural Lang. Learn., Jul. 2010, pp. 107–116.
[10] C. C. Liebrecht, F. A. Kunneman, and A. P. J. van den Bosh, ‘‘The perfect
solution for detecting sarcasm in tweets #not,’’ in Proc. WASSA, Jun. 2013,
pp. 29–37.
[11] D. Maynard and M. A. Greenwood, ‘‘Who cares about sarcastic tweets?
Investigating the impact of sarcasm on sentiment analysis,’’ in Proc. 9th
Int. Conf. Lang. Resour. Eval., May 2014, pp. 4238–4243.
[12] A. Rajadesingan, R. Zafarani, and H. Liu, ‘‘Sarcasm detection on Twitter:
A behavioral modeling approach,’’ in Proc. 18th ACM Int. Conf. Web
Search Data Mining, Feb. 2015, pp. 79–106.
[13] A. Joshi, P. Bhattacharyya, and M. J. Carman. (Feb. 2016). ‘‘Auto-
matic sarcasm detection: A survey.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1602.03426
[14] B. Sriram, D. Fuhry, E. Demir, H. Ferhatosmanoglu, and M. Demirbas,
‘‘Short text classiﬁcation in twitter to improve information ﬁltering,’’ in
Proc. 33rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2010,
pp. 841–842.
[15] C. G. Akcora, M. A. Bayir, M. Demirbas, and H. Ferhatosmanoglu, ‘‘Iden-
tifying breakpoints in public opinion,’’ in Proc. 1st Workshop Soc. Media
Anal., Jul. 2010, pp. 62–66.
[16] M. W. Berry, Ed., Survey of Text Mining: Clustering, Classiﬁcation, and
Retrieval. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[17] B. Pang, L. Lillian, and V. Shivakumar, ‘‘Thumbs up?: Sentiment classiﬁ-
cation using machine learning techniques,’’ in Proc. ACL Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Lang. Process., vol. 10. Jul. 2002, pp. 79–86.
[18] M. Boia, B. Faltings, C.-C. Musat, and P. Pu, ‘‘A :) Is worth a thousand
words: How people attach sentiment to emoticons and words in tweets,’’
in Proc. Int. Conf. Soc. Comput., Sep. 2013, pp. 345–350.
[19] K. Manuel, K. V. Indukuri, and P. R. Krishna, ‘‘Analyzing internet slang
for sentiment mining,’’ in Proc. 2nd Vaagdevi Int. Conf. Inform. Technol.
Real World Problems, Dec. 2010, pp. 9–11.
[20] L. Dong, F. Wei, C. Tan, D. Tang, M. Zhou, and K. Xu, ‘‘Adaptive recursive
neural network for target-dependent Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation,’’ in
Proc. 52nd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 2. Jun. 2014,
pp. 49–54.
[21] F. Stringfellow, Jr., The Meaning of Irony: A Psychoanalytic Investigation.
New York, NY, USA: State Univ. New York, 1994.
[22] S. G. Shamay-Tsoory, R. Tomer, and J. Aharon-Peretz, ‘‘The neuroanatom-
ical basis of understanding sarcasm and its relationship to social cogni-
tion,’’ Neuropsychology, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 288–300, May 2005.
[23] C. Burfoot and T. Baldwin, ‘‘Automatic satire detection: Are you having a
laugh?’’ in Proc. ACL-IJCNLP, Aug. 2009, pp. 161–164.
VOLUME 4, 2016
5487

M. Bouazizi, T. Ohtsuki: Pattern-Based Approach for Sarcasm Detection on Twitter
[24] J. D. Campbell and A. N. Katz, ‘‘Are there necessary conditions for
inducing a sense of sarcastic irony?’’ Discourse Process., vol. 49, no. 6,
pp. 459–480, Aug. 2012.
[25] D. Wilson, ‘‘The pragmatics of verbal irony: Echo or pretence?’’ Lingua,
vol. 116, no. 10, pp. 1722–1743, Oct. 2006.
[26] S. L. Ivanko and P. M. Pexman, ‘‘Context incongruity and irony process-
ing,’’ Discourse Process., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 241–279, 2003.
[27] R. Giora, ‘‘On irony and negation,’’ Discourse Process., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 239–264, 1995.
[28] J. Tepperman, D. Traum, and S. S. Narayanan, ‘‘‘Yeah right’: Sarcasm
recognition for spoken dialogue systems,’’ in Proc. InterSpeech, Sep. 2006,
pp. 1838–1841.
[29] T. Veale and Y. Hao, ‘‘Detecting ironic intent in creative comparisons,’’ in
Proc. ECAI, Aug. 2010, pp. 765–770.
[30] F. Barbieri, H. Saggion, and F. Ronzano, ‘‘Modelling sarcasm in Twitter, a
novel approach,’’ in Proc. WASSA, Jun. 2014, pp. 50–58.
[31] D. Ghosh, W. Guo, and S. Muresan, ‘‘Sarcastic or not: Word embeddings
to predict the literal or sarcastic meaning of words,’’ in Proc. EMNLP,
Sep. 2015, pp. 1003–1012.
[32] Z. Wang, Z. Wu, R. Wang, and Y. Ren, ‘‘Twitter sarcasm detection
exploiting a context-based model,’’ in Proc. Web Inf. Syst. Eng. (WISE),
Nov. 2015, pp. 77–91.
[33] E. Riloff, A. Qadir, P. Surve, L. De Silva, N. Gilbert, and R. Huang,
‘‘Sarcasm as contrast between a positive sentiment and negative situation,’’
in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., Oct. 2013,
pp. 704–714.
[34] S. Muresan, R. Gonzalez-Ibanez, D. Ghosh, and N. Wacholder, ‘‘Identiﬁ-
cation of nonliteral language in social media: A case study on sarcasm,’’
J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol., Jan. 2016.
[35] E. Fersini, F. A. Pozzi, and E. Messina, ‘‘Detecting irony and sarcasm in
microblogs: The role of expressive signals and ensemble classiﬁers,’’ in
Proc. IEEE Data Sci. Adv. Anal. (DSAA), Oct. 2015, pp. 1–8.
[36] S. K. Bharti, K. S. Babu, and S. K. Jena, ‘‘Parsing-based sarcasm sentiment
recognition in Twitter data,’’ in Proc. IEEE/ACM ASONAM, Aug. 2015,
pp. 1373–1380.
[37] A. Reyes, P. Rosso, and D. Buscaldi, ‘‘From humor recognition to irony
detection: The ﬁgurative language of social media,’’ Data Knowl. Eng.,
vol. 74, pp. 1–12, Apr. 2012.
[38] A. Reyes, P. Rosso, and T. Veale, ‘‘A multidimensional approach
for detecting irony in Twitter,’’ Lang. Resour. Eval., vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 239–268, Mar. 2013.
[39] A. Joshi, V. Sharma, and P. Bhattacharyya, ‘‘Harnessing context incon-
gruity for sarcasm detection,’’ in Proc. 53rd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process. (ACL-IJCNLP), vol. 2.
Jul. 2015, pp. 757–762.
[40] D. Bamman and N. A. Smith, ‘‘Contextualized sarcasm detection on
Twitter,’’ in Proc. AAAI Int. Conf. Web Soc. Media (ICWSM), May 2015,
pp. 574–577.
[41] L. Derczynski, A. Ritter, S. Clark, and K. Bontcheva, ‘‘Twitter part-of-
speech tagging for all: Overcoming sparse and noisy data,’’ in Proc. Int.
Conf. RANLP, Sep. 2013, pp. 198–206.
[42] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and
I. H. Witten, ‘‘The WEKA data mining software: An update,’’ SIGKDD
Explorations Newslett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, Jun. 2009.
[43] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin, ‘‘LIBSVM: A library for support vector
machines,’’ ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, Apr. 2011,
Art. no. 27.
[44] E. Camp, ‘‘Sarcasm, pretense, and the semantics/pragmatics distinction,’’
Noûs, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 587–634, Dec. 2012.
[45] M. S. Neethu and R. Rajasree, ‘‘Sentiment analysis in Twitter using
machine learning techniques,’’ in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput., Commun.
Netw. Technol., Jul. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[46] L. Breiman, ‘‘Random forests,’’ Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
Jan. 2001.
[47] S. Attardo, ‘‘Irony markers and functions: Towards a goal-oriented theory
of irony and its processing,’’ Rask, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 3–20, 2000.
[48] P. Rockwell, ‘‘Vocal features of conversational sarcasm: A comparison of
methods,’’ J. Psycholinguistic Res., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 361–369, Sep. 2007.
[49] P. Rockwell, ‘‘Empathy and the expression and recognition of sarcasm
by close relations or strangers,’’ Perceptual Motor Skills, vol. 97, no. 1,
pp. 251–256, Aug. 2003.
MONDHER
BOUAZIZI
received
the
B.E./
Diploma
degrees
in
communications
from
SUPCOM, Carthage University, Tunisia, in 2010.
He is currently pursuing the master’s degree with
Keio University. He was a Telecommunication
Engineer (access network quality and optimiza-
tion) for three years with Ooredoo Tunisia.
TOMOAKI
OTSUKI
(OHTSUKI)
(SM’01)
received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees from
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan, in 1990, 1992,
and 1994, respectively, all in electrical engi-
neering. From 1994 to 1995, he was a Post-
Doctoral Fellow and a Visiting Researcher of
Electrical Engineering with Keio University. From
1993 to 1995, he was a Special Researcher of
Fellowships of the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science for Japanese Junior Scientists. From
1995 to 2005, he was with the Science University of Tokyo. In 2005 he
joined Keio University. He is currently a Professor with Keio University.
From 1998 to 1999, he was with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley.
He has authored over 140 journal papers and 330 international conference
papers. He is engaged in research on wireless communications, optical
communications, signal processing, and information theory.
Dr. Ohtsuki is a fellow of the IEICE. He is a recipient of the 1997 Inoue
Research Award for Young Scientist, the 1997 Hiroshi Ando Memorial
Young Engineering Award, the Ericsson Young Scientist Award 2000, the
2002 Funai Information and Science Award for Young Scientist, the IEEE
1st Asia-Paciﬁc Young Researcher Award 2001, the 5th International Com-
munication Foundation Research Award, the 2011 IEEE SPCE Outstanding
Service Award, the 28th TELECOM System Technology Award, the ETRI
Journal’s 2012 Best Reviewer Award, and the 9th International Conference
on Communications and Networking in China 2014 (CHINACOM’14) Best
Paper Award. He served as a Chair of the IEEE Communications Society,
Signal Processing for Communications and Electronics Technical Commit-
tee. He served as a Technical Editor of the IEEE Wireless Communications
Magazine. He is currently serving as an Editor of the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS
SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS, and Elsevier Physical Communications. He has
served as a General Co-Chair and Symposium Co-Chair of many confer-
ences, including the IEEE GLOBECOM 2008, SPC, the IEEE ICC2011,
CTS, and the IEEE GCOM2012, SPC. He gave tutorials and keynote
speech with many international conferences, including the IEEE VTC, the
IEEE PIMRC, and so on. He is currently serving as a Vice President of
Communications Society of the IEICE.
5488
VOLUME 4, 2016
